README.md, before:

# scala-fx

## Getting started

Scala-fx is an effects library for Scala 3 that introduces structured concurrency and an abilities system to describe pure functions and programs. 

The example below is a pure program that returns `Int` and requires the context capability `Bind`. Bind enables the `bind` syntax over values of Either and other types.

```scala
import fx.*

val program: Int =
    Right(1).bind + Right(2).bind
// program: Int = 3
```

Using Scala3 features such as context functions we can encode pure programs in terms of capabilities with minimal overhead.
Capabilities can be introduced a la carte and will be carried as given contextual evidences through call sites until you proof you can get rid of them.

```scala
import fx.*

def runProgram: Int | String =
    val program: Errors[String] ?=> Int =
      Right(1).bind + Right(2).bind + "oops".raise[Int]

    run(program)

println(runProgram)
// oops
```

Users and library authors may define their own Capabilities. Here is how `Bind` for `Either[E, A]` is declared

```scala
/** Brings the capability to perform Monad bind in place. Types may
  * access [[Control]] to short-circuit as necessary
  */
extension [R, A](fa: Either[R, A])
  def bind: Errors[R] ?=> A = fa.fold(_.shift, identity)
```

Scala Fx supports a structured concurrency model backed by the non-blocking [StructuredExecutorTask](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/428)
where you can `fork` and `join` cancellable fibers and scopes.

Popular functions like `parallel` support arbitrary typed arity in arguments and return types.

```scala
import fx.*

def runProgram: (String, Int, Double) =
  val results: Structured ?=> (String, Int, Double) =
    parallel(
      () => "1",
      () => 0,
      () => 47.03
    )

  structured(results)

println(runProgram)
// (1,0,47.03)
```

Continuations based on Control Throwable or a non-blocking model like Loom are useful because they allow us to intermix async and sync programs in the same syntax without the need for boxing as is frequently the case in most scala effect libraries.

### Build and run in your local environment:

Pre-requisites:

- [Java 19](https://openjdk.org/projects/jdk/19/)
- Scala 3

1. Download the latest Project Loom [Early-Access build](https://openjdk.org/projects/jdk/19/) for your system architecture.

    This is easy to do if you are using [SDKMAN](https://sdkman.io/). First list java
    versions with `sdk list java`, and `sdk install java
    19-ea-<XX>-open`, where XX is the latest Java.net version 19
    release number. Make it the default with `sdk default java
    19-ea-<XX>-open`.

2. Set your `JAVA_HOME` to the path you extracted above.

  Unnecessary if you have set the ea build to be your default in sdkman.

You can now compile and run the tests:

```shell
env JAVA_OPTS='--enable-preview --add-modules jdk.incubator.concurrent' sbt "clean; compile; test"
```

**NOTE**: The Loom project is defined as an incubator module that is a means to distribute APIs which are not final or completed to get feedback from the developers.
You should include the `-add-module` Java option to add the module to the class path of the project.

Commit message:

Adds workaround for compiling with raw scalac
1) scala and scalac must be on the path
2) the scala and scalac on the path must be the version used in the
build
3) this will not run a javac compiler
4) add `.enablePlugins(ForceableCompilationPlugin)` to the project you
want to force to not use Zinc
5) you have to run mains with `<project-name>/runMain
<full-path-to-main>`.

This may require additional setup for our CI/CD.

This is only necessary until https://github.com/sbt/sbt/issues/7157 is fixed.

README.md, after:

# scala-fx


## BUILD NOTICE

To allow main ci build (which doesn't have access to coursier), until https://github.com/sbt/sbt/issues/7157 is resolved (attached zinc PR confirmed and submitted passing all checks), the following example projects are *NOT* aggregated by the root project:

* continuationsPluginExample
* zero-arguments-no-continuation-treeview
* zero-arguments-one-continuation-code-before-used-after
* list-map
* two-arguments-two-continuations

These projects use `forcecompilation` to run scalac via coursier and
ignore the standard zinc incremental build, as it is broken.

You must compile these with prior to PR manually with sbt. For example, to compile continuationsPluginExample:

```shell
$ sbt
root> continuationsPluginExample/compile
```

To run a main in these projects, you must use the `runMain` command and the Fully Qualified Name of the main you wish to run. For example, to run `examples.ThreeDependentContinuations` in the continuationsPluginExample project:

```shell
$ sbt
root> continuationsPluginExample/runMain examples.ThreeDependentContinuations
```

## Getting started

Scala-fx is an effects library for Scala 3 that introduces structured concurrency and an abilities system to describe pure functions and programs. 

The example below is a pure program that returns `Int` and requires the context capability `Bind`. Bind enables the `bind` syntax over values of Either and other types.

```scala
import fx.*

val program: Int =
    Right(1).bind + Right(2).bind
// program: Int = 3
```

Using Scala3 features such as context functions we can encode pure programs in terms of capabilities with minimal overhead.
Capabilities can be introduced a la carte and will be carried as given contextual evidences through call sites until you proof you can get rid of them.

```scala
import fx.*

def runProgram: Int | String =
    val program: Errors[String] ?=> Int =
      Right(1).bind + Right(2).bind + "oops".raise[Int]

    run(program)

println(runProgram)
// oops
```

Users and library authors may define their own Capabilities. Here is how `Bind` for `Either[E, A]` is declared

```scala
/** Brings the capability to perform Monad bind in place. Types may
  * access [[Control]] to short-circuit as necessary
  */
extension [R, A](fa: Either[R, A])
  def bind: Errors[R] ?=> A = fa.fold(_.shift, identity)
```

Scala Fx supports a structured concurrency model backed by the non-blocking [StructuredExecutorTask](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/428)
where you can `fork` and `join` cancellable fibers and scopes.

Popular functions like `parallel` support arbitrary typed arity in arguments and return types.

```scala
import fx.*

def runProgram: (String, Int, Double) =
  val results: Structured ?=> (String, Int, Double) =
    parallel(
      () => "1",
      () => 0,
      () => 47.03
    )

  structured(results)

println(runProgram)
// (1,0,47.03)
```

Continuations based on Control Throwable or a non-blocking model like Loom are useful because they allow us to intermix async and sync programs in the same syntax without the need for boxing as is frequently the case in most scala effect libraries.

### Build and run in your local environment:

Pre-requisites:

- [Java 19](https://openjdk.org/projects/jdk/19/)
- Scala 3

1. Download the latest Project Loom [Early-Access build](https://openjdk.org/projects/jdk/19/) for your system architecture.

    This is easy to do if you are using [SDKMAN](https://sdkman.io/). First list java
    versions with `sdk list java`, and `sdk install java
    19-ea-<XX>-open`, where XX is the latest Java.net version 19
    release number. Make it the default with `sdk default java
    19-ea-<XX>-open`.

2. Set your `JAVA_HOME` to the path you extracted above.

  Unnecessary if you have set the ea build to be your default in sdkman.

You can now compile and run the tests:

```shell
env JAVA_OPTS='--enable-preview --add-modules jdk.incubator.concurrent' sbt "clean; compile; test"
```

**NOTE**: The Loom project is defined as an incubator module that is a means to distribute APIs which are not final or completed to get feedback from the developers.
You should include the `-add-module` Java option to add the module to the class path of the project.
